Contents
ACT I
Scene I. Elsinore. A platform before the Castle.
Scene II. Elsinore. A room of state in the Castle
Scene III. A room in Polonius’s house.
Scene IV. The platform.
Scene V. A more remote part of the Castle.

ACT II
Scene I. A room in Polonius’s house.
Scene II. A room in the Castle.

ACT III
Scene I. A room in the Castle.
Scene II. A hall in the Castle.
Scene III. A room in the Castle.
Scene IV. Another room in the Castle.

ACT IV
Scene I. A room in the Castle.
Scene II. Another room in the Castle.
Scene III. Another room in the Castle.
Scene IV. A plain in Denmark.
Scene V. Elsinore. A room in the Castle.
Scene VI. Another room in the Castle.
Scene VII. Another room in the Castle.

ACT V
Scene I. A churchyard.
Scene II. A hall in the Castle.


Dramatis Personæ

HAMLET, Prince of Denmark.
CLAUDIUS, King of Denmark, Hamlet’s uncle.
The GHOST of the late king, Hamlet’s father.
GERTRUDE, the Queen, Hamlet’s mother, now wife of Claudius.
POLONIUS, Lord Chamberlain.
LAERTES, Son to Polonius.
OPHELIA, Daughter to Polonius.
HORATIO, Friend to Hamlet.
FORTINBRAS, Prince of Norway.
VOLTEMAND, Courtier.
CORNELIUS, Courtier.
ROSENCRANTZ, Courtier.
GUILDENSTERN, Courtier.
MARCELLUS, Officer.
BARNARDO, Officer.
FRANCISCO, a Soldier
OSRIC, Courtier.
REYNALDO, Servant to Polonius.
Players.
A Gentleman, Courtier.
A Priest.
Two Clowns, Grave-diggers.
A Captain.
English Ambassadors.
Lords, Ladies, Officers, Soldiers, Sailors, Messengers, and Attendants.

SCENE. Elsinore.



ACT I

SCENE I. Elsinore. A platform before the Castle.

 Enter Francisco and Barnardo, two sentinels.

BARNARDO. Who’s there?

FRANCISCO. Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.

BARNARDO. Long live the King!

FRANCISCO. Barnardo?

BARNARDO. He.

FRANCISCO. You come most carefully upon your hour.

BARNARDO. ’Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.

FRANCISCO. For this relief much thanks. ’Tis bitter cold, And I am sick
at heart.

BARNARDO. Have you had quiet guard?

FRANCISCO. Not a mouse stirring.

BARNARDO. Well, good night. If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus, The
rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.

 Enter Horatio and Marcellus.

FRANCISCO. I think I hear them. Stand, ho! Who is there?

HORATIO. Friends to this ground.

MARCELLUS. And liegemen to the Dane.

FRANCISCO. Give you good night.

MARCELLUS. O, farewell, honest soldier, who hath reliev’d you?

FRANCISCO. Barnardo has my place. Give you good-night.

 [_Exit._]

MARCELLUS. Holla, Barnardo!

BARNARDO. Say, what, is Horatio there?

HORATIO. A piece of him.

BARNARDO. Welcome, Horatio. Welcome, good Marcellus.

MARCELLUS. What, has this thing appear’d again tonight?

BARNARDO. I have seen nothing.

MARCELLUS. Horatio says ’tis but our fantasy, And will not let belief
take hold of him Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us.
Therefore I have entreated him along With us to watch the minutes of
this night, That if again this apparition come He may approve our eyes
and speak to it.

HORATIO. Tush, tush, ’twill not appear.

BARNARDO. Sit down awhile, And let us once again assail your ears, That
are so fortified against our story, What we two nights have seen.

HORATIO. Well, sit we down, And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.

BARNARDO. Last night of all, When yond same star that’s westward from
the pole, Had made his course t’illume that part of heaven Where now it
burns, Marcellus and myself, The bell then beating one—

MARCELLUS. Peace, break thee off. Look where it comes again.

 Enter Ghost.

BARNARDO. In the same figure, like the King that’s dead.

MARCELLUS. Thou art a scholar; speak to it, Horatio.

BARNARDO. Looks it not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.

HORATIO. Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.

BARNARDO It would be spoke to.

MARCELLUS. Question it, Horatio.

HORATIO. What art thou that usurp’st this time of night, Together with
that fair and warlike form In which the majesty of buried Denmark Did
sometimes march? By heaven I charge thee speak.

MARCELLUS. It is offended.

BARNARDO. See, it stalks away.

HORATIO. Stay! speak, speak! I charge thee speak!

 [_Exit Ghost._]

MARCELLUS. ’Tis gone, and will not answer.

BARNARDO. How now, Horatio! You tremble and look pale. Is not this
something more than fantasy? What think you on’t?

HORATIO. Before my God, I might not this believe Without the sensible
and true avouch Of mine own eyes.

MARCELLUS. Is it not like the King?

HORATIO. As thou art to thyself: Such was the very armour he had on
When he th’ambitious Norway combated; So frown’d he once, when in an
angry parle He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice. ’Tis strange.

MARCELLUS. Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour, With martial
stalk hath he gone by our watch.

HORATIO. In what particular thought to work I know not; But in the
gross and scope of my opinion, This bodes some strange eruption to our
state.

MARCELLUS. Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows, Why this
same strict and most observant watch So nightly toils the subject of
the land, And why such daily cast of brazen cannon And foreign mart for
implements of war; Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
Does not divide the Sunday from the week. What might be toward, that
this sweaty haste Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day: Who
is’t that can inform me?

HORATIO. That can I; At least, the whisper goes so. Our last King,
Whose image even but now appear’d to us, Was, as you know, by
Fortinbras of Norway, Thereto prick’d on by a most emulate pride, Dar’d
to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet, For so this side of our
known world esteem’d him, Did slay this Fortinbras; who by a seal’d
compact, Well ratified by law and heraldry, Did forfeit, with his life,
all those his lands Which he stood seiz’d of, to the conqueror; Against
the which, a moiety competent Was gaged by our King; which had return’d
To the inheritance of Fortinbras, Had he been vanquisher; as by the
same cov’nant And carriage of the article design’d, His fell to Hamlet.
Now, sir, young Fortinbras, Of unimproved mettle, hot and full, Hath in
the skirts of Norway, here and there, Shark’d up a list of lawless
resolutes, For food and diet, to some enterprise That hath a stomach
in’t; which is no other, As it doth well appear unto our state, But to
recover of us by strong hand And terms compulsatory, those foresaid
lands So by his father lost. And this, I take it, Is the main motive of
our preparations, The source of this our watch, and the chief head Of
this post-haste and rummage in the land.

BARNARDO. I think it be no other but e’en so: Well may it sort that
this portentous figure Comes armed through our watch so like the King
That was and is the question of these wars.

HORATIO. A mote it is to trouble the mind’s eye. In the most high and
palmy state of Rome, A little ere the mightiest Julius fell, The graves
stood tenantless and the sheeted dead Did squeak and gibber in the
Roman streets; As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,
Disasters in the sun; and the moist star, Upon whose influence
Neptune’s empire stands, Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse. And
even the like precurse of fierce events, As harbingers preceding still
the fates And prologue to the omen coming on, Have heaven and earth
together demonstrated Unto our climatures and countrymen.

 Re-enter Ghost.

But, soft, behold! Lo, where it comes again! I’ll cross it, though it
blast me. Stay, illusion! If thou hast any sound, or use of voice,
Speak to me. If there be any good thing to be done, That may to thee do
ease, and grace to me, Speak to me. If thou art privy to thy country’s
fate, Which, happily, foreknowing may avoid, O speak! Or if thou hast
uphoarded in thy life Extorted treasure in the womb of earth, For
which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death, Speak of it. Stay, and
speak!

 [_The cock crows._]

Stop it, Marcellus!

MARCELLUS. Shall I strike at it with my partisan?

HORATIO. Do, if it will not stand.

BARNARDO. ’Tis here!

HORATIO. ’Tis here!

 [_Exit Ghost._]

MARCELLUS. ’Tis gone! We do it wrong, being so majestical, To offer it
the show of violence, For it is as the air, invulnerable, And our vain
blows malicious mockery.

BARNARDO. It was about to speak, when the cock crew.

HORATIO. And then it started, like a guilty thing Upon a fearful
summons. I have heard The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn, Doth
with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat Awake the god of day; and at
his warning, Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air, Th’extravagant
and erring spirit hies To his confine. And of the truth herein This
present object made probation.

MARCELLUS. It faded on the crowing of the cock. Some say that ever
’gainst that season comes Wherein our Saviour’s birth is celebrated,
The bird of dawning singeth all night long; And then, they say, no
spirit dare stir abroad, The nights are wholesome, then no planets
strike, No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm; So hallow’d and
so gracious is the time.

HORATIO. So have I heard, and do in part believe it. But look, the morn
in russet mantle clad, Walks o’er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
Break we our watch up, and by my advice, Let us impart what we have
seen tonight Unto young Hamlet; for upon my life, This spirit, dumb to
us, will speak to him. Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it, As
needful in our loves, fitting our duty?

MARCELLUS. Let’s do’t, I pray, and I this morning know Where we shall
find him most conveniently.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Elsinore. A room of state in the Castle.

 Enter Claudius King of Denmark, Gertrude the Queen, Hamlet, Polonius,
 Laertes, Voltemand, Cornelius, Lords and Attendant.

KING. Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother’s death The memory be
green, and that it us befitted To bear our hearts in grief, and our
whole kingdom To be contracted in one brow of woe; Yet so far hath
discretion fought with nature That we with wisest sorrow think on him,
Together with remembrance of ourselves. Therefore our sometime sister,
now our queen, Th’imperial jointress to this warlike state, Have we, as
’twere with a defeated joy, With one auspicious and one dropping eye,
With mirth in funeral, and with dirge in marriage, In equal scale
weighing delight and dole, Taken to wife; nor have we herein barr’d
Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone With this affair along. For
all, our thanks. Now follows, that you know young Fortinbras, Holding a
weak supposal of our worth, Or thinking by our late dear brother’s
death Our state to be disjoint and out of frame, Colleagued with this
dream of his advantage, He hath not fail’d to pester us with message,
Importing the surrender of those lands Lost by his father, with all
bonds of law, To our most valiant brother. So much for him. Now for
ourself and for this time of meeting: Thus much the business is: we
have here writ To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras, Who, impotent and
bed-rid, scarcely hears Of this his nephew’s purpose, to suppress His
further gait herein; in that the levies, The lists, and full
proportions are all made Out of his subject: and we here dispatch You,
good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand, For bearers of this greeting to old
Norway, Giving to you no further personal power To business with the
King, more than the scope Of these dilated articles allow. Farewell;
and let your haste commend your duty.

CORNELIUS and VOLTEMAND. In that, and all things, will we show our
duty.

KING. We doubt it nothing: heartily farewell.

 [_Exeunt Voltemand and Cornelius._]

And now, Laertes, what’s the news with you? You told us of some suit.
What is’t, Laertes? You cannot speak of reason to the Dane, And lose
your voice. What wouldst thou beg, Laertes, That shall not be my offer,
not thy asking? The head is not more native to the heart, The hand more
instrumental to the mouth, Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
What wouldst thou have, Laertes?

LAERTES. Dread my lord, Your leave and favour to return to France, From
whence though willingly I came to Denmark To show my duty in your
coronation; Yet now I must confess, that duty done, My thoughts and
wishes bend again toward France, And bow them to your gracious leave
and pardon.

KING. Have you your father’s leave? What says Polonius?

POLONIUS. He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave By laboursome
petition; and at last Upon his will I seal’d my hard consent. I do
beseech you give him leave to go.

KING. Take thy fair hour, Laertes; time be thine, And thy best graces
spend it at thy will! But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son—

HAMLET. [_Aside._] A little more than kin, and less than kind.

KING. How is it that the clouds still hang on you?

HAMLET. Not so, my lord, I am too much i’ the sun.

QUEEN. Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off, And let thine eye look
like a friend on Denmark. Do not for ever with thy vailed lids Seek for
thy noble father in the dust. Thou know’st ’tis common, all that lives
must die, Passing through nature to eternity.

HAMLET. Ay, madam, it is common.

QUEEN. If it be, Why seems it so particular with thee?

HAMLET. Seems, madam! Nay, it is; I know not seems. ’Tis not alone my
inky cloak, good mother, Nor customary suits of solemn black, Nor windy
suspiration of forc’d breath, No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
Nor the dejected haviour of the visage, Together with all forms, moods,
shows of grief, That can denote me truly. These indeed seem, For they
are actions that a man might play; But I have that within which passeth
show; These but the trappings and the suits of woe.

KING. ’Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet, To give these
mourning duties to your father; But you must know, your father lost a
father, That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound In filial
obligation, for some term To do obsequious sorrow. But to persevere In
obstinate condolement is a course Of impious stubbornness. ’Tis unmanly
grief, It shows a will most incorrect to heaven, A heart unfortified, a
mind impatient, An understanding simple and unschool’d; For what we
know must be, and is as common As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
Why should we in our peevish opposition Take it to heart? Fie, ’tis a
fault to heaven, A fault against the dead, a fault to nature, To reason
most absurd, whose common theme Is death of fathers, and who still hath
cried, From the first corse till he that died today, ‘This must be so.’
We pray you throw to earth This unprevailing woe, and think of us As of
a father; for let the world take note You are the most immediate to our
throne, And with no less nobility of love Than that which dearest
father bears his son Do I impart toward you. For your intent In going
back to school in Wittenberg, It is most retrograde to our desire: And
we beseech you bend you to remain Here in the cheer and comfort of our
eye, Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.

QUEEN. Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet. I pray thee stay
with us; go not to Wittenberg.

HAMLET. I shall in all my best obey you, madam.

KING. Why, ’tis a loving and a fair reply. Be as ourself in Denmark.
Madam, come; This gentle and unforc’d accord of Hamlet Sits smiling to
my heart; in grace whereof, No jocund health that Denmark drinks today
But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell, And the King’s rouse the
heaven shall bruit again, Re-speaking earthly thunder. Come away.

 [_Exeunt all but Hamlet._]

HAMLET. O that this too too solid flesh would melt, Thaw, and resolve
itself into a dew! Or that the Everlasting had not fix’d His canon
’gainst self-slaughter. O God! O God! How weary, stale, flat, and
unprofitable Seem to me all the uses of this world! Fie on’t! Oh fie!
’tis an unweeded garden That grows to seed; things rank and gross in
nature Possess it merely. That it should come to this! But two months
dead—nay, not so much, not two: So excellent a king; that was to this
Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother, That he might not beteem
the winds of heaven Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth! Must
I remember? Why, she would hang on him As if increase of appetite had
grown By what it fed on; and yet, within a month— Let me not think
on’t—Frailty, thy name is woman! A little month, or ere those shoes
were old With which she followed my poor father’s body Like Niobe, all
tears.—Why she, even she— O God! A beast that wants discourse of reason
Would have mourn’d longer,—married with mine uncle, My father’s
brother; but no more like my father Than I to Hercules. Within a month?
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears Had left the flushing in her
galled eyes, She married. O most wicked speed, to post With such
dexterity to incestuous sheets! It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
But break my heart, for I must hold my tongue.

 Enter Horatio, Marcellus and Barnardo.

HORATIO. Hail to your lordship!

HAMLET. I am glad to see you well: Horatio, or I do forget myself.

HORATIO. The same, my lord, And your poor servant ever.

HAMLET. Sir, my good friend; I’ll change that name with you: And what
make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?— Marcellus?

MARCELLUS. My good lord.

HAMLET. I am very glad to see you.—Good even, sir.— But what, in faith,
make you from Wittenberg?

HORATIO. A truant disposition, good my lord.

HAMLET. I would not hear your enemy say so; Nor shall you do my ear
that violence, To make it truster of your own report Against yourself.
I know you are no truant. But what is your affair in Elsinore? We’ll
teach you to drink deep ere you depart.

HORATIO. My lord, I came to see your father’s funeral.

HAMLET. I prithee do not mock me, fellow-student. I think it was to see
my mother’s wedding.

HORATIO. Indeed, my lord, it follow’d hard upon.

HAMLET. Thrift, thrift, Horatio! The funeral bak’d meats Did coldly
furnish forth the marriage tables. Would I had met my dearest foe in
heaven Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio. My father,—methinks I see
my father.

HORATIO. Where, my lord?

HAMLET. In my mind’s eye, Horatio.

HORATIO. I saw him once; he was a goodly king.

HAMLET. He was a man, take him for all in all, I shall not look upon
his like again.

HORATIO. My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.

HAMLET. Saw? Who?

HORATIO. My lord, the King your father.

HAMLET. The King my father!

HORATIO. Season your admiration for a while With an attent ear, till I
may deliver Upon the witness of these gentlemen This marvel to you.

HAMLET. For God’s love let me hear.

HORATIO. Two nights together had these gentlemen, Marcellus and
Barnardo, on their watch In the dead waste and middle of the night,
Been thus encounter’d. A figure like your father, Armed at point
exactly, cap-à-pie, Appears before them, and with solemn march Goes
slow and stately by them: thrice he walk’d By their oppress’d and
fear-surprised eyes, Within his truncheon’s length; whilst they,
distill’d Almost to jelly with the act of fear, Stand dumb, and speak
not to him. This to me In dreadful secrecy impart they did, And I with
them the third night kept the watch, Where, as they had deliver’d, both
in time, Form of the thing, each word made true and good, The
apparition comes. I knew your father; These hands are not more like.

HAMLET. But where was this?

MARCELLUS. My lord, upon the platform where we watch.

HAMLET. Did you not speak to it?

HORATIO. My lord, I did; But answer made it none: yet once methought It
lifted up it head, and did address Itself to motion, like as it would
speak. But even then the morning cock crew loud, And at the sound it
shrunk in haste away, And vanish’d from our sight.

HAMLET. ’Tis very strange.

HORATIO. As I do live, my honour’d lord, ’tis true; And we did think it
writ down in our duty To let you know of it.

HAMLET. Indeed, indeed, sirs, but this troubles me. Hold you the watch
tonight?

Mar. and BARNARDO. We do, my lord.

HAMLET. Arm’d, say you?

Both. Arm’d, my lord.

HAMLET. From top to toe?

BOTH. My lord, from head to foot.

HAMLET. Then saw you not his face?

HORATIO. O yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.

HAMLET. What, look’d he frowningly?

HORATIO. A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.

HAMLET. Pale, or red?

HORATIO. Nay, very pale.

HAMLET. And fix’d his eyes upon you?

HORATIO. Most constantly.

HAMLET. I would I had been there.

HORATIO. It would have much amaz’d you.

HAMLET. Very like, very like. Stay’d it long?

HORATIO. While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.

MARCELLUS and BARNARDO. Longer, longer.

HORATIO. Not when I saw’t.

HAMLET. His beard was grizzled, no?

HORATIO. It was, as I have seen it in his life, A sable silver’d.

HAMLET. I will watch tonight; Perchance ’twill walk again.

HORATIO. I warrant you it will.

HAMLET. If it assume my noble father’s person, I’ll speak to it, though
hell itself should gape And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all, If
you have hitherto conceal’d this sight, Let it be tenable in your
silence still; And whatsoever else shall hap tonight, Give it an
understanding, but no tongue. I will requite your loves. So, fare ye
well. Upon the platform ’twixt eleven and twelve, I’ll visit you.

ALL. Our duty to your honour.

HAMLET. Your loves, as mine to you: farewell.

 [_Exeunt Horatio, Marcellus and Barnardo._]

My father’s spirit in arms! All is not well; I doubt some foul play:
would the night were come! Till then sit still, my soul: foul deeds
will rise, Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s eyes.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE III. A room in Polonius’s house.

 Enter Laertes and Ophelia.

LAERTES. My necessaries are embark’d. Farewell. And, sister, as the
winds give benefit And convoy is assistant, do not sleep, But let me
hear from you.

OPHELIA. Do you doubt that?

LAERTES. For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favour, Hold it a fashion
and a toy in blood; A violet in the youth of primy nature, Forward, not
permanent, sweet, not lasting; The perfume and suppliance of a minute;
No more.

OPHELIA. No more but so?

LAERTES. Think it no more. For nature crescent does not grow alone In
thews and bulk; but as this temple waxes, The inward service of the
mind and soul Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now, And now no
soil nor cautel doth besmirch The virtue of his will; but you must
fear, His greatness weigh’d, his will is not his own; For he himself is
subject to his birth: He may not, as unvalu’d persons do, Carve for
himself; for on his choice depends The sanctity and health of this
whole state; And therefore must his choice be circumscrib’d Unto the
voice and yielding of that body Whereof he is the head. Then if he says
he loves you, It fits your wisdom so far to believe it As he in his
particular act and place May give his saying deed; which is no further
Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal. Then weigh what loss your
honour may sustain If with too credent ear you list his songs, Or lose
your heart, or your chaste treasure open To his unmaster’d importunity.
Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister; And keep you in the rear of
your affection, Out of the shot and danger of desire. The chariest maid
is prodigal enough If she unmask her beauty to the moon. Virtue itself
scopes not calumnious strokes: The canker galls the infants of the
spring Too oft before their buttons be disclos’d, And in the morn and
liquid dew of youth Contagious blastments are most imminent. Be wary
then, best safety lies in fear. Youth to itself rebels, though none
else near.

OPHELIA. I shall th’effect of this good lesson keep As watchman to my
heart. But good my brother, Do not as some ungracious pastors do, Show
me the steep and thorny way to heaven; Whilst like a puff’d and
reckless libertine Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads, And
recks not his own rede.

LAERTES. O, fear me not. I stay too long. But here my father comes.

 Enter Polonius.

A double blessing is a double grace; Occasion smiles upon a second
leave.

POLONIUS. Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame. The wind sits
in the shoulder of your sail, And you are stay’d for. There, my
blessing with you.

 [_Laying his hand on Laertes’s head._]

And these few precepts in thy memory Look thou character. Give thy
thoughts no tongue, Nor any unproportion’d thought his act. Be thou
familiar, but by no means vulgar. Those friends thou hast, and their
adoption tried, Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel; But do
not dull thy palm with entertainment Of each new-hatch’d, unfledg’d
comrade. Beware Of entrance to a quarrel; but being in, Bear’t that
th’opposed may beware of thee. Give every man thine ear, but few thy
voice: Take each man’s censure, but reserve thy judgment. Costly thy
habit as thy purse can buy, But not express’d in fancy; rich, not
gaudy: For the apparel oft proclaims the man; And they in France of the
best rank and station Are of a most select and generous chief in that.
Neither a borrower nor a lender be: For loan oft loses both itself and
friend; And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry. This above all: to
thine own self be true; And it must follow, as the night the day, Thou
canst not then be false to any man. Farewell: my blessing season this
in thee.

LAERTES. Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.

POLONIUS. The time invites you; go, your servants tend.

LAERTES. Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well What I have said to you.

OPHELIA. ’Tis in my memory lock’d, And you yourself shall keep the key
of it.

LAERTES. Farewell.

 [_Exit._]

POLONIUS. What is’t, Ophelia, he hath said to you?

OPHELIA. So please you, something touching the Lord Hamlet.

POLONIUS. Marry, well bethought: ’Tis told me he hath very oft of late
Given private time to you; and you yourself Have of your audience been
most free and bounteous. If it be so,—as so ’tis put on me, And that in
way of caution,—I must tell you You do not understand yourself so
clearly As it behoves my daughter and your honour. What is between you?
Give me up the truth.

OPHELIA. He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders Of his affection
to me.

POLONIUS. Affection! Pooh! You speak like a green girl, Unsifted in
such perilous circumstance. Do you believe his tenders, as you call
them?

OPHELIA. I do not know, my lord, what I should think.

POLONIUS. Marry, I’ll teach you; think yourself a baby; That you have
ta’en these tenders for true pay, Which are not sterling. Tender
yourself more dearly; Or,—not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
Roaming it thus,—you’ll tender me a fool.

OPHELIA. My lord, he hath importun’d me with love In honourable
fashion.

POLONIUS. Ay, fashion you may call it; go to, go to.

OPHELIA. And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord, With almost
all the holy vows of heaven.

POLONIUS. Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know, When the blood
burns, how prodigal the soul Lends the tongue vows: these blazes,
daughter, Giving more light than heat, extinct in both, Even in their
promise, as it is a-making, You must not take for fire. From this time
Be something scanter of your maiden presence; Set your entreatments at
a higher rate Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet, Believe so
much in him that he is young; And with a larger tether may he walk Than
may be given you. In few, Ophelia, Do not believe his vows; for they
are brokers, Not of that dye which their investments show, But mere
implorators of unholy suits, Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds,
The better to beguile. This is for all. I would not, in plain terms,
from this time forth Have you so slander any moment leisure As to give
words or talk with the Lord Hamlet. Look to’t, I charge you; come your
ways.

OPHELIA. I shall obey, my lord.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. The platform.

 Enter Hamlet, Horatio and Marcellus.

HAMLET. The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.

HORATIO. It is a nipping and an eager air.

HAMLET. What hour now?

HORATIO. I think it lacks of twelve.

MARCELLUS. No, it is struck.

HORATIO. Indeed? I heard it not. It then draws near the season Wherein
the spirit held his wont to walk.

 [_A flourish of trumpets, and ordnance shot off within._]

What does this mean, my lord?

HAMLET. The King doth wake tonight and takes his rouse, Keeps wassail,
and the swaggering upspring reels; And as he drains his draughts of
Rhenish down, The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out The triumph of
his pledge.

HORATIO. Is it a custom?

HAMLET. Ay marry is’t; And to my mind, though I am native here, And to
the manner born, it is a custom More honour’d in the breach than the
observance. This heavy-headed revel east and west Makes us traduc’d and
tax’d of other nations: They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish
phrase Soil our addition; and indeed it takes From our achievements,
though perform’d at height, The pith and marrow of our attribute. So
oft it chances in particular men That for some vicious mole of nature
in them, As in their birth, wherein they are not guilty, Since nature
cannot choose his origin, By their o’ergrowth of some complexion, Oft
breaking down the pales and forts of reason; Or by some habit, that too
much o’erleavens The form of plausive manners;—that these men,
Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect, Being Nature’s livery or
Fortune’s star,— His virtues else,—be they as pure as grace, As
infinite as man may undergo, Shall in the general censure take
corruption From that particular fault. The dram of evil Doth all the
noble substance often doubt To his own scandal.

HORATIO. Look, my lord, it comes!

 Enter Ghost.

HAMLET. Angels and ministers of grace defend us! Be thou a spirit of
health or goblin damn’d, Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts
from hell, Be thy intents wicked or charitable, Thou com’st in such a
questionable shape That I will speak to thee. I’ll call thee Hamlet,
King, father, royal Dane. O, answer me! Let me not burst in ignorance;
but tell Why thy canoniz’d bones, hearsed in death, Have burst their
cerements; why the sepulchre, Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn’d, Hath
op’d his ponderous and marble jaws To cast thee up again! What may this
mean, That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel, Revisit’st thus
the glimpses of the moon, Making night hideous, and we fools of nature
So horridly to shake our disposition With thoughts beyond the reaches
of our souls? Say, why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?

 [_Ghost beckons Hamlet._]

HORATIO. It beckons you to go away with it, As if it some impartment
did desire To you alone.

MARCELLUS. Look with what courteous action It waves you to a more
removed ground. But do not go with it.

HORATIO. No, by no means.

HAMLET. It will not speak; then will I follow it.

HORATIO. Do not, my lord.

HAMLET. Why, what should be the fear? I do not set my life at a pin’s
fee; And for my soul, what can it do to that, Being a thing immortal as
itself? It waves me forth again. I’ll follow it.

HORATIO. What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord, Or to the
dreadful summit of the cliff That beetles o’er his base into the sea,
And there assume some other horrible form Which might deprive your
sovereignty of reason, And draw you into madness? Think of it. The very
place puts toys of desperation, Without more motive, into every brain
That looks so many fadoms to the sea And hears it roar beneath.

HAMLET. It waves me still. Go on, I’ll follow thee.

MARCELLUS. You shall not go, my lord.

HAMLET. Hold off your hands.

HORATIO. Be rul’d; you shall not go.

HAMLET. My fate cries out, And makes each petty artery in this body As
hardy as the Nemean lion’s nerve.

 [_Ghost beckons._]

Still am I call’d. Unhand me, gentlemen.

 [_Breaking free from them._]

By heaven, I’ll make a ghost of him that lets me. I say, away!—Go on,
I’ll follow thee.

 [_Exeunt Ghost and Hamlet._]

HORATIO. He waxes desperate with imagination.

MARCELLUS. Let’s follow; ’tis not fit thus to obey him.

HORATIO. Have after. To what issue will this come?

MARCELLUS. Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.

HORATIO. Heaven will direct it.

MARCELLUS. Nay, let’s follow him.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. A more remote part of the Castle.

 Enter Ghost and Hamlet.

HAMLET. Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak, I’ll go no further.

GHOST. Mark me.

HAMLET. I will.

GHOST. My hour is almost come, When I to sulph’rous and tormenting
flames Must render up myself.

HAMLET. Alas, poor ghost!

GHOST. Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing To what I shall
unfold.

HAMLET. Speak, I am bound to hear.

GHOST. So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.

HAMLET. What?

GHOST. I am thy father’s spirit, Doom’d for a certain term to walk the
night, And for the day confin’d to fast in fires, Till the foul crimes
done in my days of nature Are burnt and purg’d away. But that I am
forbid To tell the secrets of my prison-house, I could a tale unfold
whose lightest word Would harrow up thy soul; freeze thy young blood,
Make thy two eyes like stars start from their spheres, Thy knotted and
combined locks to part, And each particular hair to stand on end Like
quills upon the fretful porcupine. But this eternal blazon must not be
To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list! If thou didst ever thy
dear father love—

HAMLET. O God!

GHOST. Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.

HAMLET. Murder!

GHOST. Murder most foul, as in the best it is; But this most foul,
strange, and unnatural.

HAMLET. Haste me to know’t, that I, with wings as swift As meditation
or the thoughts of love May sweep to my revenge.

GHOST. I find thee apt; And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed
That rots itself in ease on Lethe wharf, Wouldst thou not stir in this.
Now, Hamlet, hear. ’Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard, A
serpent stung me; so the whole ear of Denmark Is by a forged process of
my death Rankly abus’d; but know, thou noble youth, The serpent that
did sting thy father’s life Now wears his crown.

HAMLET. O my prophetic soul! Mine uncle!

GHOST. Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast, With witchcraft of
his wit, with traitorous gifts,— O wicked wit, and gifts, that have the
power So to seduce!—won to his shameful lust The will of my most
seeming-virtuous queen. O Hamlet, what a falling off was there, From
me, whose love was of that dignity That it went hand in hand even with
the vow I made to her in marriage; and to decline Upon a wretch whose
natural gifts were poor To those of mine. But virtue, as it never will
be mov’d, Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven; So lust,
though to a radiant angel link’d, Will sate itself in a celestial bed
And prey on garbage. But soft! methinks I scent the morning air; Brief
let me be. Sleeping within my orchard, My custom always of the
afternoon, Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole With juice of cursed
hebenon in a vial, And in the porches of my ears did pour The leperous
distilment, whose effect Holds such an enmity with blood of man That
swift as quicksilver it courses through The natural gates and alleys of
the body; And with a sudden vigour it doth posset And curd, like eager
droppings into milk, The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine; And
a most instant tetter bark’d about, Most lazar-like, with vile and
loathsome crust All my smooth body. Thus was I, sleeping, by a
brother’s hand, Of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatch’d: Cut off
even in the blossoms of my sin, Unhous’led, disappointed, unanel’d; No
reckoning made, but sent to my account With all my imperfections on my
head. O horrible! O horrible! most horrible! If thou hast nature in
thee, bear it not; Let not the royal bed of Denmark be A couch for
luxury and damned incest. But howsoever thou pursu’st this act, Taint
not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive Against thy mother aught; leave
her to heaven, And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge, To prick
and sting her. Fare thee well at once! The glow-worm shows the matin to
be near, And ’gins to pale his uneffectual fire. Adieu, adieu, adieu.
Hamlet, remember me.

 [_Exit._]

HAMLET. O all you host of heaven! O earth! What else? And shall I
couple hell? O, fie! Hold, my heart; And you, my sinews, grow not
instant old, But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee? Ay, thou poor
ghost, while memory holds a seat In this distracted globe. Remember
thee? Yea, from the table of my memory I’ll wipe away all trivial fond
records, All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past, That youth
and observation copied there; And thy commandment all alone shall live
Within the book and volume of my brain, Unmix’d with baser matter. Yes,
by heaven! O most pernicious woman! O villain, villain, smiling damned
villain! My tables. Meet it is I set it down, That one may smile, and
smile, and be a villain! At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark.

 [_Writing._]

So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word; It is ‘Adieu, adieu, remember
me.’ I have sworn’t.

HORATIO and MARCELLUS. [_Within._] My lord, my lord.

MARCELLUS. [_Within._] Lord Hamlet.

HORATIO. [_Within._] Heaven secure him.

HAMLET. So be it!

MARCELLUS. [_Within._] Illo, ho, ho, my lord!

HAMLET. Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come.

 Enter Horatio and Marcellus.

MARCELLUS. How is’t, my noble lord?

HORATIO. What news, my lord?

HAMLET. O, wonderful!

HORATIO. Good my lord, tell it.

HAMLET. No, you’ll reveal it.

HORATIO. Not I, my lord, by heaven.

MARCELLUS. Nor I, my lord.

HAMLET. How say you then, would heart of man once think it?— But you’ll
be secret?

HORATIO and MARCELLUS. Ay, by heaven, my lord.

HAMLET. There’s ne’er a villain dwelling in all Denmark But he’s an
arrant knave.

HORATIO. There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave To tell us
this.

HAMLET. Why, right; you are i’ the right; And so, without more
circumstance at all, I hold it fit that we shake hands and part: You,
as your business and desires shall point you,— For every man hath
business and desire, Such as it is;—and for my own poor part, Look you,
I’ll go pray.

HORATIO. These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.

HAMLET. I’m sorry they offend you, heartily; Yes faith, heartily.

HORATIO. There’s no offence, my lord.

HAMLET. Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio, And much offence
too. Touching this vision here, It is an honest ghost, that let me tell
you. For your desire to know what is between us, O’ermaster’t as you
may. And now, good friends, As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
Give me one poor request.

HORATIO. What is’t, my lord? We will.

HAMLET. Never make known what you have seen tonight.

HORATIO and MARCELLUS. My lord, we will not.

HAMLET. Nay, but swear’t.

HORATIO. In faith, my lord, not I.

MARCELLUS. Nor I, my lord, in faith.

HAMLET. Upon my sword.

MARCELLUS. We have sworn, my lord, already.

HAMLET. Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.
